---
title: "Chapter One: Ruby"
author: "Kurtis Rainbolt-Greene"
---


How This Book Works
-------------------

**Good,** you've heroically started reading the book!
I promise the this chapter won't be too terribly boring.
Each chapter will be brief, but important, so read it all.
Inside of each chapter you will see *five sections*, and each section will have:

* A brief summary of what the section will teach you
* A bit of ruby code
* The resulting output of the code
* A detailed description of each (new) important part
* Some extra credit tasks

Now that I've given you the keys to this map lets figure out what you should do when you read a new chapter (some of this is explained later):

1. Read the brief summary, don't worry if you don't fully understand it.
2. In your *project directory* create a new file called `task-n.rb` where n is the task number.
3. Write everything from the code into the file. **Do not copy and paste**.
4. Read the detailed description and the code you just wrote.
5. Run the code. **Note**: Some sections will have **secret bugs** just for you to figure out!
6. If you feel confidant check out the extra credit, change the code, and get messy!

Once you've followed each step you should understand another part of how Ruby works.
Stick with it you'll be hacking out programs left and right.


What Is Programming?
--------------------

> The computer programmer is a creator of universes for which he alone is responsible.
> Universes of virtually unlimited complexity can be created in the form of computer programs.
> - - -
> **Joseph Weizenbaum**, Computer Power and Human Reason

Programming, Hacking, Coding, Developing, and many other words for the same thing:
Writing instructions in a strange language that the computer will interperate and then act on.
People have been doing it since the early 1970's.
While the process is dramatically different, the ideas and concepts are nearly identical.

To put it as vaguely as possible, because the fine details aren't important, programming is writing instructions for the computer to act on.
That's it, no pretty wording or complex phrases, nothing really hard to comprehend.
For Ruby that means something that'll look like this:

~~~ language-ruby
def chores
  pick_up trash
  take_out trash
  vacuum(carpet)
  mop kitchen
end
~~~

The Ruby Interpretor then reads each line and does as you've instructed, which can include making mistakes!
One thing to remember in the following lessions: Computers are really dumb!
If you told a computer to jump off a bridge, *they would jump off a bridge*.
Consider the following:

~~~ language-ruby
number = 1

while number == 1
  print "I Love ruby"
end
~~~

Even with your limited knowledge of programming you should be able to spot the problem.
The computer would keep printing that statement *forever*, until the batteries ran out!


What Is Ruby?
-------------

> A dynamic, open source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity.
> It has an elegant syntax that is natural to read and easy to write.
> - - -
> **Ruby Lang**, http://ruby-lang.org

So by now you're probably wondering what Ruby **is**, beyond a programming language I mean.
In a lot of tech jargon (which I'm required by law to say) Ruby is:

* Imperative
* Procedural
* Object-Oriented
* Duck Typed
* Expressive

A lot of these terms are useless to know for now so I won't bother explaining them.
That said it's a good idea to understand what they're used for!
Programming languages have all one thing in common: You write some stuff in a specific syntax and a computer reads that to do what you want.
Just like there are different Human speaking languages, and even different ways to write written languages, programming languages have different **traits**.
These traits are used to define how well a language adheres to a type of use.
For instance, Ruby is an **Object Oriented** programming language, but that only means it's *really* good at Object Oriented programming.
How you use a language is entirely up to you.

You may have noticed a strange word up there, the very last one, calling Ruby **expressive**.
This is arguably the most important trait Ruby has and the meaning is quite interesting.
Expressive is a trait word used to describe a language as Human.
Here's an example, the first is a Hello World program in Java (non-expressive), the second in Ruby:

**Java "Hello, World"**:

~~~ language-java
public class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World");
    }
}
~~~


**Ruby "Hello, World"**

~~~ language-ruby
print 'Hello, World'
~~~

You might think at first glance that Ruby is clearly the superior here!
Look how much we didn't have to write to get the same exact output!
That's a trap though, because the brevity was gained at the sacrifice of fine control.
There are some things Ruby will never be able to do that Java can, and one of those is speed.
A **highly optimized** Java application, tuned to the brink, is *hare-vs-tutrle* fast.


The Red Culture
---------------

*Note*: You can skip this section and it wont hurt your learning, this is mostly for nerds.

Now that you know what Ruby is it's time to learn about the history.
Ruby was officially given it's name on 1993-02-24, in Japan by it's creator [Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yukihiro_Matsumoto).
The language went public 1995-12-21 with Ruby version 0.95.
Ruby version 1.0 wouldn't crawl out until a year later, 1996-12-25.
Somewhere during the year 2000 Ruby would finally become used mainstream outside of Japan.
2001-12-15 the Pragmatic Programmers released Programming Ruby, otherwise known as *The Pickaxe Guide*.
2001 also happened to be the year of the ever successful convention *RubyConf*, which was first called RubyConf?.new(2001).
It's an inside joke you'll get later.

The ball didn't start really rolling until [David "DHH" Heinemeier Hansson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Heinemeier_Hansson) hit the scene.
DHH developed the Rails framework (Usually called Ruby On Rails) and opened sourced it 2004-07.
He didn't give commit rights to anyone else until 2005-02 and even after it's kept to a strict few.
Rails exploded the web development scene, for Rails made web development easy and enjoyable.
In  2004-08, Apple Inc. announced that Mac OS X (10.5, Leopard) would ship with the latest Rails stable and Ruby.

From Rails' success came many Ruby libraries and projects that opened a whole new door for many developers.
There you have it, Ruby's history all in two paragraphs.


Other Resources
---------------

Now you're probably wondering, what happens if I have a problem or something I can't figure out?
Well you're in luck, because I've thought of that exactly!
To solve most problems you have others who want to help will need detailed *logs* of your problem.
These are usually called *error logs* and the helper will need you to share.

The first step is to copy all the output from the error and paste it to somewhere like [http://gist.github.com].
You'll notice there is a huge text box, in here you should describe the steps that you took to get where you are in the problem.
Then you'll want to paste the actual output of the error.
The person helping you should, after you've shared the link with them, be able to pick out the problem.

Who are these mysterious helpers I'm talking about?
Why they're other developers, like yourself, who have probably screwed up more code than you've seen!
The best places to find people willing to help is at [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com).
Simply follow the instructions I've given, and the ones on Stack Overflow, and you should have a solution in no time!
What if you didn't get a solution?
Here are some other, less effective, alternatives:

* [Ruby Mailing List](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/community/mailing-lists/), an email list with tons of experts.
* [Ruby IRC Channel](http://irc.lc/freenode/ruby-lang/t4nk@@@), an old way of communicating on the internet.
* [My Email](mailto:kurtisrainboltgreene@gmail.com), if all else fails.
